---
layout: post
title: " Angkor Wat"
author: hrisc
categories: [ Poems ]
tags: [ Poetry, Personal ]
---

Either this was the year in my memory  
or it was the other one; in any case, the   
same reflecting-pool was glimmering  
in the morning with the eyes of lotus   
and rocks with lungs breathing, belching  
the abandoned morning. She was with me  
at the reflecting-pool, stone and sand  
and all, wilting like the powdery weeds  
under comfortable boots. Morning comes  
and then afternoon, the evening and night.  
One follows the other; the tiger hunts deer  
and the deer never the tiger. The year I knew  
was within me, not upon the calendar  
and unmarked by pencil-lead, with its April  
lasting the whole of September and I mis-  
remembered June. Internally, all months  
paint alike. The bottom of the pond was  
drowsy, yelling chase chase chase away  
the morning sunlight someone left their  
camera exposed, capturing the melted  
bricks among the palms. Green at first   
then washed over completely the water  
came alive all sudden compactly. In the   
mirror it bathed the stone. Everywhere,  
the granite bathes the sunlight: it is  
morning in sanctuary. I wonder; did  
garlic grow naturally in the soil as turnip  
or other tubers infest earth  
or if I stole it from the other world?  
  
Invention was first, coming out of the horizon  
with illuminating beams striding across  
limb on limb, movement swallowing  
every meter, every rhythm. The spade  
a spade; the club a club and an ace a ace;  
that axiomatic moment before a new  
beginning, a ship undergoing repairs   
in the port before setting out on galaxy,  
the same music dwells. A hearse and stone  
aligned in death. The constellation of existence   
twinkles once, twice, and then dies  
its light is revisited every four years.   
Either the chameleon casts its skin off and  
sheds all colour of rainbow, or you take  
your clothes off and the fire in existence  
dwindles for a minute before burning up  
in renewal and rebirth. The holy city  
was built and now unbuilt: the wind eats up  
the rocks in order, and steep stairs no one can  
climb up house the empty room to be alone  
within. Strange is the light that the window  
let in, strange was its dissonance (and the snake  
heard the music without ears) when it hit  
the corner and bounced inebriated through  
the random rooms. In its entropy, it illuminates  
the path to paradise, Shakya-muni, sage of the  
Shakyas, inside the empty room. The Hunter  
stalks inside the knotted weeds tracing wild pigs  
and where the tiger was. A bird flies into  
the mouth of the tiger. We walk through the  
same stone, the arching weathered arches  
held together by friction and woven slabs  
defying an entire segment of universe that  
exists inside, between the arch and the earth  
where a sprig of rosemary grows like a child  
growing in an infirmary. Walking through the  
battered halls, an ancient spider navigates   
the crevices weaving silk among the screens  
embroidering torture and death upon the  
hell screen, remnant of Akutagawa, the   
painter in his mind observing the last  
dredges of reality sprawling it upon a canvas  
where the pain becomes reality and  
there is no longer reality. The exception is  
the one on the corner, without its demons  
and the lone woman in the corner sitting  
with herself, a screen without consequence  
the world is turning on its solitude.   
  
Green is the water of the reflecting-pool  
giving us time to think. Wet soil, a tripod  
unearthing the alternate ground, sediment  
and jungle river flowing relentlessly (the   
trip moves onward. As though no one else  
is there, as though this is the only morning  
and each hurries forward, foot behind foot,  
across the lightless courtyard. We were on   
a  
river, crossing water without knowing but  
the buoys kept bouncing unreliably.) forward,  
pushing into tributaries further up and  
tumbling down to sea. When there was a   
mountain, the river ran down it. Nearness,  
and away the green grass grows, all around  
in bunches of flash, carrot-grass plastered  
in yellow tones. Each is inevitable. In the north,  
there was a port with the crannies jut up   
in backwaters all slanting, slanting like  
the mouth of a river (and a bird flew into  
the mouth of a tiger) deceiving the real  
abacus of nature. One river, born in the glacier  
meanders through a lone agriculture without  
pausing; the other carries straight its windowed  
dams, its varicose veins swimming with the  
glittering light. Pausing with you, I know  
the river pauses, I know that there is a pattern  
in the way the rain rushes down in silver  
and an orange separates into segments. She moved  
in shambles, an old train through the tracks   
from Darjeeling down to the station in the south  
where every wagon must be going somewhere  
and a creeper sings down the wall. That was in  
the winter and it is April now, all the disaster  
in between crumples like smoking-paper, ashes  
in the wind.   
